[BLOG] Two years of contributions to conda-forge: work done during our CZI EOSS 5 grant (#898)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge.md

In parallel, we were trying to write some documentation for the infrastructure details we were discovering as part of our audit and research. After all, one of the problems we detected is that the existing documentation was too scarce and out of date. Maybe because the contribution workflow in the old conda-forge website was very clunky. Specially in comparison to what we had observed in other projects that were using [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/). Our hunch was that if we smoothened the contribution frictions, maybe more folks would be inclined to help maintain the documentation.

We decided to start a prototype Docusaurus website just to see how it felt to write for this platform, and... the writing experience was too good to ignore. Live reload just _works_ and it is instantaneous. Docusaurus would not only allow us to write a React app for the status page. It would also enable refactors in all those other Sphinx add-ons, like the blog or the announcements page and RSS feed. Instead of having many loosely coupled repositories, we could have _one_ website built from _one_ place...

So we went for it!

> While Afshin Darian (QuantStack) was building the new status page (link to PRs here), we were lucky to have Asmit Malakannawar join us for an internship in conda-forge. He was in charge of designing a new, modern frontpage for the Docusaurus site. You can read about this experience in this blog post. Together with Tania Allard and Isabela Presedo-Floyd (Quansight), as well as Gabriela Vives (QuantStack), we ensured that the new design and color system complied to essential accessibility affordances.

Author: To do:

- Elaborate a bit more on the status page setup (why it is static, and not Quetz based)
- Add those PR links

---
title: 'Two years of contributions to conda-forge: work done during our CZI EOSS 5 grant'
published: January 20, 2025
authors: [jaime-rodriguez-guerra]
description: |
  In 2022 we were awarded a CZI EOSS grant for conda-forge. The proposal, co-submitted by Quansight Labs and QuantStack, targeted three areas: maintaining and improving conda-forge's infrastructure, creating a new maintainer's dashboard, and implementing OCI-based mirroring for the packages. This work has now concluded and we would like to publish a summary of what we achieved!
category: [Packaging]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge/TBD.png
  alt: 'TBD'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge/TBD.png

>   imageAlt: 'TBD'

Author: Pending.

---
title: 'Two years of contributions to conda-forge: work done during our CZI EOSS 5 grant'

> published: January 20, 2025

Reviewer: TODO: update when publishing

Author: ```suggestion
published: February 10, 2025
```

Assuming we are aiming for a Monday merge.

## What are conda, conda-forge and bioconda?

The conda ecosystem provides unified open source tools and specifications to build and distribute precompiled packages for software projects across different operating systems, architectures, and programming languages. Its unique position in data science, research, and scientific software engineering is a testament to its capabilities, particularly in scenarios where different programming languages and platforms are often used together to tackle complex multidisciplinary challenges.

> The conda ecosystem includes various community-driven projects, like the bioconda and conda-forge build farms. These are collective efforts maintain a increasingly large collection of conda recipes and automation infrastructure. Founded in 2015 in response to frustrations scientific software users consistently faced when attempting to install system package dependencies. While conda-forge is a general purpose channel, Bioconda extends conda-forge to cater the computational biology field needs, as explained in their [Nature publication](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-018-0046-7).

Author: Yep, conda-forge was founded in 2015. See https://api.github.com/orgs/conda-forge

      style={{ width: '500px', height: 'auto', objectFit: 'contain' }}
    />
    </a>
    <figcaption>Figure 1e: The former Status page rendered directly on <code>conda-forge/status</code>.</figcaption>
  </figure>
  
  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center', flex: 1, margin: 0 }}>
    <a href="/posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge/conda-forge-old-6.png" target="_blank">
    <img 
      src="/posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge/conda-forge-old-6.png"
      alt="Screenshot of the original Packages page in the conda-forge website, with a search bar that filters which packages are provided by which feedstocks. Text in neon green on white background."
      style={{ width: '500px', height: 'auto', objectFit: 'contain' }}
    />
    </a>
    <figcaption>Figure 1f: This is how the Packages page looked like in the old site.</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

One of those add-ons was the `/status` page, which consisted on a periodically regenerated static HTML document templated with Jinja. The idea was to rewrite this page with modern web components, like a React app that could fetch the necessary data on demand, live, without having to resort to cronjob-driven regeneration.

> In parallel, we were trying to write some documentation for the infrastructure details we were discovering as part of our audit and research. After all, one of the problems we detected is that the existing documentation was too scarce and out of date. Maybe because the contribution workflow in the old conda-forge website was very clunky. Specially in comparison to what we had observed in other projects that were using [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/). Our hunch was that if we smoothened the contribution frictions, maybe more folks would be inclined to help maintain the documentation.

Author: > This was a side effect of the clunkiness in the previous contribution workflow.

Can we say that with certainty? It was a hypothesis we could only confirm by changing parameters in the contribution workflow.

> In parallel, we were trying to write some documentation for the infrastructure details we were discovering as part of our audit and research. After all, one of the problems we detected is that the existing documentation was too scarce and out of date. Maybe because the contribution workflow in the old conda-forge website was very clunky. Specially in comparison to what we had observed in other projects that were using [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/). Our hunch was that if we smoothened the contribution frictions, maybe more folks would be inclined to help maintain the documentation.

Reviewer: 🤔 not sure, let's leave it as it is then

### Better UX interacting with the conda-forge bots

Getting involved with conda-forge's infrastructure so deeply makes you discover small opportunities for better UX.

Some examples of the former include having the `@conda-forge-admin` commands react with the rocket emoji 🚀 as soon as an event is triggered so users have early feedback before the bot can perform the requested task. The `@conda-forge-admin, please update version` commands will also open as draft while the version is being fetched to avoid early notifications, and the title will be updated with the found version if successful for better commit messages upon merge!

### Microarchitecture-aware package builds

> conda-forge ships binary builds so users don't have to compile anything on their machines. It should Just Work (tm) upon extraction. To do so, compiled dependencies are built specifically for each platform and architecture (e.g. Linux running ARM or Windows running on x64). However, this also force us to use compilation flags that target the most common chips, leaving some optimization opportunites for more modern CPUs on the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conda-forge ships binary builds, so users don't have to compile anything on their machines. It should Just Work (tm) upon extraction. Compiled dependencies are built specifically for each platform and architecture (e.g., Linux running ARM or Windows running on x64). However, this also forces us to use compilation flags that target the most common chips, leaving some optimization opportunities for more modern CPUs on the table.
```

> Isuru [contributed](https://github.com/archspec/archspec/pull/150) `archspec` support for Windows, which finally allowed conda-forge to ship [microarchitecture-optimized binaries](https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge.github.io/issues/1261) across all platforms. While we recommend trying other methods first, like runtime dispatching to different variants of the same library, this method can be useful for libraries that cannot implement it. Use it sparingly though, they can really explode your CI matrix!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Isuru [contributed `archspec` support for Windows](https://github.com/archspec/archspec/pull/150), which finally allowed conda-forge to ship [microarchitecture-optimized binaries](https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge.github.io/issues/1261) across all platforms. While we recommend trying other methods first, like runtime dispatching to different variants of the same library, this method can be useful for libraries that cannot implement it. Use it sparingly, though; they can really explode your CI matrix!
```

Building consensus takes many forms and channels: community meetings, ecosystem specifications, Github issues, chat platforms. Since we had to rely on all of them in one way or another, we ended up contributing small improvements in many different places.

The conda-forge team meets every two Wednesdays to discuss a variety of topics. Notes are kept in [HackMD](https://hackmd.io/) documents that are then submitted as a PR to the `conda-forge/conda-forge.github.io`. This used to be a manual process, but we added a couple of [Github Actions workflows](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/hackmd-meeting-notes-action) to automate the creation of a new HackMD document from a given template, open a PR and then, once done with the meeting, sync back by adding a label (see [example PR](https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge.github.io/pull/2423)). Works pretty well for both conda-forge and conda community!

> In addition to Github issues and PRs, the conda-forge community had a couple rooms in Gitter (which then became Matrix / Element rooms). After spending some years in this platform, we found that it was not providing a good enough story for us. We proposed moving to Zulip via CFEP 23, which was approved by the core team. We have been using that platform successfully for a few months now, and also submitted a similar proposal to the conda community (CEP 18), which was also approved. That means that both conda-forge and conda community are now using Zulip! Visit us at [conda-forge.zulipchat.com](https://conda-forge.zulipchat.com/) and [conda.zulipchat.com](https://conda.zulipchat.com), respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to GitHub issues and PRs, the conda-forge community had a couple of rooms in Gitter (which then became Matrix / Element rooms). After spending some years on this platform, we found that it did not provide a good enough story for us. We proposed moving to Zulip via CFEP 23, which was approved by the core team. We have been using that platform successfully for a few months and submitted a similar proposal to the conda community (CEP 18), which was also approved. That means that both conda-forge and conda community are now using Zulip! Visit us at [conda-forge.zulipchat.com](https://conda-forge.zulipchat.com/) and [conda.zulipchat.com](https://conda.zulipchat.com), respectively.
```

As we started working on this project, we realized there were many synergies from other funding sources that could be aligned together for maximum output. So in the next few sections you will also learn about other initiatives that ended up scoped together, like the new website or the GPU CI server.

## Website and maintenance dashboard revamp

The [conda-forge.org website](https://conda-forge.org) used to be built around its Sphinx documentation, with several add-ons coming in from different repositories that ended up being "mounted" on the main conda-forge.org deployment.
While functional, this approach made the site difficult to maintain and led to many inconsistencies in design, usability, and contribution workflows.

<div style={{ display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'center', gap: '20px', alignItems: 'flex-start' }}>
  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center', flex: 1, margin: 0 }}>
    <a href="/posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge/conda-forge-old-1.png" target="_blank">
    <img 
      src="/posts/czi-eoss-5-conda-forge/conda-forge-old-1.png"

>       alt="Screenshot of the frontpage of the original conda-forge website. A forge emitting impact sparks is used as a dark background. A prominent large white text reading conda-forge sits below the official conda-forge logo, a black anvil. Some smaller text follows, also in white."

Author: @trallard I assume I also need to rework these alt captions by e.g. removing "Screenshot of" and similar?

Reviewer: yes please
